---
layout: post
title: Initial thoughts on GitHub Copilot
---

Recently, GitHub [announced](https://github.blog/2021-06-29-introducing-github-copilot-ai-pair-programmer/) the technical preview of [GitHub Copilot](https://copilot.github.com), which is marketed as a AI pair programmer. In essence, it is pretty much an AI-powered code completion tool.

I could still remember when [OpenAI](https://openai.com) first announced the beta release of GPT-3 in May 2020. I was rather impressed with the potential of the tool and the numerous use cases that were made possible with it. Yet, it was also mildly concerning about the jobs that could potentially displaced with the new tool. My thoughts when I first saw the launch of GitHub Copilot were no different; equally excited yet fearful that my job could potentially be replaced with AI.

Having played with GitHub Copilot for a few weeks now, I wanted to share some of my initial thoughts on the tool, areas where it fell short, and how I might use it in the future.

## Code quality

I tested GitHub Copilot across multiple languages/projects and one thing that was immediately apparent to me was the code quality generated by the tool. Often times, I never really 'accepted' the code proposed by the tool because it did not understand what I wanted to write or that the quality of the code generated is not as good.

Since I have to continually reject the code proposals, I found it rather distracting because whenever every time a new code snippet is proposed, I will have to quickly evaluate in my brain, and then make decision on whether to accept or reject it. This is not to say that this workflow is entirely bad (I may have exaggerated it a little bit), but it does add some amount of distraction and cognitive load on my thought process when I code.

In addition, I am also concerned that code proposals may not always propose preferred ways of writing since GitHub Copilot essentially references code that are available publicly. For example, with the introduction of [PEP 634](https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0634/) in Python 3.10, it is generally preferable to express complex logic flows using the `match` statement rather than a long `if`/`elif`/`else` chain. On the same note, poorly written code that has known security vulnerabilities could also be proposed by GitHub Copilot and be naively accepted by the user.

In my opinion, a pair programmer (as it is marketed), should be a tool that helps you write better code. Based on my preliminary observations, it seems to me that using GitHub Copilot, especially if you are not conversant on the language syntax or conventions, might not necessarily be a good idea.

## Licensing concerns

Since GitHub Copilot uses publicly available code with differing source code licenses for training, there are [legal concerns](https://fossa.com/blog/analyzing-legal-implications-github-copilot/) on whether it is safe to use the code suggestions generated by GitHub Copilot in projects. Some code snippets suggested by GitHub Copilot could be taken from projects that are covered by strong copyleft licenses, which could be an license violation if used in projects that are not aligned with the corresponding license terms.

Clearly, we are in uncharted waters here and it is not clear what the legal implications of using GitHub Copilot are. In my opinion, it is a better idea to hold off from using the tool at the moment until we have further clarity on whether the code suggestions generated by GitHub Copilot are safe to use.

## Final thoughts

Overall, I think it was pretty fun playing around with GitHub Copilot. The ability for GitHub Copilot to generate relevant code with some contextual description was certainly impressive. Yet, despite so, GitHub Copilot does not feel like a very polished product. Certainly, we are probably some distance from where GitHub Copilot can eventually be a competent pair programming tool or even replace coders.

In languages like Go, where there are lots of boilerplate code to write, I think GitHub Copilot comes in rather handy. I also found that GitHub Copilot is particularly helpful when writing techinical documentations.

I am hopeful that GitHub Copilot will continue to improve and tweak the tool to make it more useful. It remains to be seen how GitHub will evolve the product with the feedback gathered from the community.
